Good morning, everyone.
To present session 408,
OpenGL Advanced Optimization,
I would like to introduce
OpenGL manager John Stauffer.
Hi.
So today we're going to talk about
advanced optimizations in OpenGL.
So hopefully we'll learn a few things
about how OpenGL works and things you
can do to try to tune your applications.
So,
So, what we'll learn is the key
components that you need to look
at when you're trying to tune your
application for higher frame rates.
The thing that I always like to start
talking about is application component.
And the reason for that is that
about 75% of the time is spent in the
application in a common OpenGL app.
And so therefore,
since 75% of the time is spent there,
that's where you have the potential
for getting the most benefit.
So, if you don't tune your application,
obviously you're not going to get a
lot out of OpenGL because you'll spend
too much time in the application.
So, we'll spend some time just talking
about techniques for tuning your
application to drive OpenGL better and
some hints on and tips on how to do that.
The second thing is setup.
So, how to properly set up OpenGL,
how to get some machine information,
how to properly configure and scale
your application such that it will run
well on the machine that you're using.
The third thing is state management.
So, state management basically is where
a large percent of the time that is
spent in the actual OpenGL timeframe
is spent in state management.
So, state management actually is more
important than a lot of people think.
If you do a lot of thrashing
of state in OpenGL,
you can actually decrease
your performance quite a bit.
Texture management.
Texture management is important.
Texture management is important to keep
your application correctly scaled for the
hardware so that you're not paging a lot,
you're not spending a lot
of time running out of video
memory and paging on and off.
Vertex operations.
So, vertex operations are important
obviously to be able to get
a lot of data to the card,
have an optimal format
for sending the data,
keeping the data flow
moving quickly to the card.
Bye.
Perfragment operations.
So perfragment operations
are the operations that the
card itself is going to do.
So it's not CPU related,
but it's what the graphics
card is going to have to do
to generate your final image.
And there's some tips there to
offload some of the work the
graphics card is going to need to do.
Extensions.
So a lot of times there's extensions
that you can utilize that are either
directly geared towards optimizing
your application or will help you
get the animation effect you're
looking for with a simpler path.
So you won't have to do,
you can simplify your CPU work
by utilizing an extension.
Multi-CPU or multi-thread utilization.
Obviously if there's a
machine that has two CPUs,
it's an ideal situation to spawn
another thread and maybe move your
graphics off to that other CPU.
And lastly what we'll talk about briefly
is where to look for more information.
So, starting off here,
just to get the image of
what OpenGL looks like and
how data goes to OpenGL.
It's important to think of
OpenGL as a data stream.
So OpenGL fundamentally is a
data stream going to the card,
and how the data is organized in
that stream is very important.
Because it will give you hesitations if
you have too many operations of one type,
or if you're flushing and breaking that
stream and causing discontinuities.
So the fundamental type of data
that goes to OpenGL is vertices,
which is your 3D data, and state.
So you can fundamentally--
this is a simplistic view--
but you can fundamentally break
it down into those two types of
data sets that go to the card.
And how that data, again,
gets organized and sent to the
card can make a big difference.
So, application.
So, the thing to remember when
you're looking at writing an
OpenGL application is first,
you have to decide obviously what type
of performance you're looking for.
And to do that,
you need to obviously decide what type
of user interaction there's going to be.
You know,
whether you need high frame rates
because the user needs a fast response
time on the graphical feedback,
which may mean you need 30, 50,
60 frames per second.
You need to decide what type
of quality display in your
application you're going to need.
And obviously,
those two things can be related.
So, adjusting the right quality with
the frame rate is going to give
your user the best experience.
So, it's important to keep those in mind.
Your target platform.
So, deciding what your ideal platform is
going to be and what you're going to
run best on is going to be important.
So, that you can potentially scale
your application to run well
on those target platforms.
And the things to remember about the
target platform are video memory size,
how much system memory you're going
to be needing for the application,
and potentially what graphics
cards in the system so that
you can have the animation
effects that you're looking for.
So the thing that a lot of applications
provide obviously is a mechanism
for users to adjust the quality
settings within the application.
And this is usually important such that
a user can himself or herself select the
tradeoff they want between performance
and quality such that they can have
some influence on their preferences
as to how fast the application will
run or what the quality will look like.
So the first thing we do,
and we do this a lot at Apple,
is we'll take an application to try to
analyze where the time is being spent.
We'll take the application,
and we will run it with
a null layer of OpenGL.
We'll try to figure out how fast OpenGL,
if OpenGL was infinitely fast,
how fast would that application run?
And this gives us an upper bounds,
and this helps us understand what the
application itself is doing and what
profiling may be needed to be further
done in the application to tune it.
So two ways to, depending on your
programming environment,
and just a reminder, actually,
all the code that I'm going to be
showing today is Mac OS X Cocoa-based.
I'm going to,
since we have limited slide space,
I'm going to stick to
those function calls.
So to no-op out the OpenGL layer,
there's a couple ways you can do
it in your application very easily.
For the CGL layer,
if you're programming straight
to the core OpenGL layer,
you can simply set your
OpenGL context to null,
and what that does is that actually,
internal to OpenGL,
that will have OpenGL set all
the entry points to a no-op,
so they will do nothing.
And if you're at the app kit layer,
then you can use an app kit call
just to clear the current context,
and it's equivalent
to setting it to null,
and again, that will just set all
the entry points to null,
to no-ops.
And so what you want to do,
once you've done that, is you want to,
measure the time that's spent in your
application to get a feel for what level
of performance your application's at.
And here we see a little code snippet
using get time a day to just quickly
calculate time spent in the application.
So once we've done that,
we can calculate an open loop,
OpenGL no-op frames per second
that your application's capable of.
So obviously if you're,
once you've gotten to this point,
you realize that you've
no-opped OpenGL out,
it's infinitely faster,
and you're able to do that.
So that's a little bit of a tip there.
It's infinitely fast,
and you're not achieving the frame
rates that you would like to be at.
You can immediately start, you know,
thinking about going into your
application and tuning your application.
What we do is you can
do a quick calculation.
Assuming an average application spends
about 25% of the time in OpenGL,
you can take that open loop frame rates
per second and just multiply it by .75.
So lower that frame rate down and get
an estimate of what you're going to run,
what your performance is going
to be once you enable OpenGL.
And
If this estimated frames per second
isn't where you want it to be again,
you're going to have to start looking
at either OpenGL or you're going to have
to start looking at your application.
So to start tuning your application,
on OS X there's a variety
of tools to do this.
One tool that's very
useful is called Sampler.
For anybody that hasn't used Sampler,
it's a tool that will--.
So, it's a thread,
it's a threaded tool that will
go out and look where your call
stack is at any given time.
And it will generate a sample,
a heuristic of where the time is
being spent in the application.
So, this tool actually is very useful.
It works for CFM apps and Mac OS apps.
And it's part of the developer install.
So, it's on your disk at
developer application sampler.
And it's a very useful tool.
We suggest everybody become
familiar with how to use it.
And it will show you where all the hot
spots are in your application code.
It will even show you where the hot
spots are in the operating system itself.
But you may want to run this without
OpenGL and just run your application open
loop and just stress your application
and find out where the hotspots are.
Okay, so that was enough talking
about the application.
So setting up OpenGL,
the first thing you need to do obviously
is to go out and query for devices and
find what your--what devices you have,
how many devices and such.
So I've got a couple code snippets
up here that will show you in core
graphics how to get your device--get
your main device and how to,
from the main device,
generate an OpenGL display mask.
So the first code snippet
here is just the main device.
If you wanted to go
through all the devices,
you could get all the active
display devices from core graphics,
loop through them,
generate a display mask that
represents all of the--all
the devices on the system.
And really,
it's going to depend on whether
you're a full screen or a windowed
application as to what you're going--what
the right thing for you to do is.
So what we can do with this information
is we can find out how much video memory
is in the system on each graphics card.
So here we've got a code snippet that
will query the renderer for video memory.
And it goes through the loop
and it will look at each device,
querying it for video memory size.
And this is going to be important
because as we start to try to
adjust or tune our application,
we're going to want to make sure
that the amount of textures we have,
the resources we're going to
be consuming on the card are
going to fit in video memory.
So we're going to want to know
this usually up front if we have
a texture intensive application.
OK,
so when we look at the video memory size,
there are several things
that we may want to adjust.
Again,
we may want to adjust texture sizes,
but we may also want to
adjust the screen resolution.
If we're going to be switching
into a full screen mode,
let's say, we're going to have the
opportunity for picking a screen
depth and a screen resolution.
If you have determined that your
application needs more video memory
than is potentially available
in the current display mode,
then you'll want to switch it down
to a 16-bit color potentially,
or you'll want to switch
down the resolution,
give the application more breathing
room on the graphics card,
and that will help with keeping your
application out of a texture paging
mode and give the-- a higher frame rate
during the running of the application.
So the other thing you'll want to do
is to find out what CPU you're on.
One thing that we find very
useful is internally to
OpenGL obviously is using Altevec.
And Altevec can give you substantial
performance boosts if you utilize it.
So finding out if you're on
a G3 or a G4 is very useful.
And tuning to that condition
can be very beneficial.
The other thing to remember about
that is that typically the difference
between a G3 and G4 is that G4 systems
are going to be faster and you may want
to think about adjusting your data set
size to accommodate the faster systems.
So quickly talking
about state management.
So state management, again,
is the process of switching what mode
OpenGL is running in to get your proper
configuration for drawing your graphics.
The thing to remember with state
changes is you want to minimize those.
What we have found is that
in a lot of applications,
the amount of time that's
actually spent in OpenGL,
a considerable portion of that is
actually doing state management.
And if you...
Unnecessarily changed state,
you can cause a lot of thrashing down on
the card because OpenGL has to go through
a lot of setup to properly configure
the graphics card for each state change.
Some state changes are obviously
more expensive than others and
we'll go through a few of those,
which ones to avoid.
But in general,
you want to group your data to
minimize state changes and that will
have a significant impact on what
performance you can ultimately achieve.
So,
Some general calls you want to avoid.
GL flush.
So you want to avoid GL flush.
Because what it actually does is, if you,
again, think about OpenGL as a command
stream going to the graphics card.
GL flush tells the graphics card,
terminate the current command stream,
send it to the graphics
card and start me a new one.
So you've just chopped that command
stream and sent it on its way.
And the reason that you don't want
to do this necessarily is because
there's only so many command buffers
that you can have allocated to
your application at any given time.
So if you sit there and
call GL flush a lot,
you will use up the buffers that you
have available to your application
and your application may be starved
for available space to stick,
you know, put data on the stream.
So unless you have to,
don't call GL flush.
And there's actually very few
reasons they would call it.
Usually you can find some other way
to do what you're looking to do.
If you want the user to
see something immediately,
usually you just call swap buffers to
get the data swapped to the screen.
And swap buffers actually calls,
is implicitly calls a flush.
So when you call swap,
it terminates the stream,
sends it to the card and so
you don't necessarily have
to call GL flush yourself.
Another call that's even
more expensive is GL finish.
So GL finish is like a GL flush,
except for it sends the data to
the card and it actually will block
there waiting for the graphics
card to finish its drawing.
So once all the commands have
gone to the graphics card,
finished, come back and return,
it will send the data to the card and
it will block the data to the card.
So once all the commands have gone
to the card and it has finished,
come back and return,
then GL finish will actually
return to your application.
So an important performance
thing to keep in mind is that
GL finish is very expensive.
It can be a blocking call that
can take quite a while to return.
So you want to avoid reading
data back from OpenGL.
And when it comes to state management,
typically what you want to do is
you want to keep the data in the
application that you will need later
and not ask OpenGL for it back.
Depending on the driver and
what you're reading back,
it can get very expensive.
Reading back data can actually be
the same cost of calling a GLFinish
because if you're reading pixels back,
for instance,
the pixels actually have to represent
the current state that you are expecting.
And that is you've drawn
all these commands,
you've issued all these drawing commands,
you're expecting the
pixels to be in the buffer.
Well, so OpenGL realizes this,
and when you try to
read some pixels back,
it's going to have to call finish,
wait till all the commands are finished,
wait till it's drawn everything,
before it can give you
the valid pixels back.
So you don't want to read the
frame buffer unless you have to,
you don't want to be reading state.
Some state can be expensive to read,
and you don't want to read
textures unless you have to.
They all can have varying penalties
depending on what mode you're running in.
So what you also want to think
about when you're writing OpenGL is
avoid complex state settings.
If you don't know what
a state setting does,
usually it's a bad idea to just
arbitrarily throw state changes in there.
What you'll want to do is keep
the state as simple as possible,
because this will help the graphics
card run in its most optimal mode.
This will also usually lead to
less state thrashing when you
are trying to transition from
one drawing routine to another,
you won't have to do as much
state setup and teardown,
so it'll lead to less state transition.
So keeping it simple is
obviously a simplistic concept,
but it's something to keep in mind.
So some basic complex states that
you want to avoid are lighting,
user clipping planes, and full scene,
well, anti-aliasing,
like anti-aliasing lines,
anti-aliasing points, polyons.
And the reason you want to avoid those is
because they can be very expensive to do.
With modern hardware,
lighting and user clipping planes and
even anti-aliasing lines are pretty fast.
So again, it may depend on the particular
graphics card you're running on.
But in general,
lighting is very computationally
expensive and unless you
have a real need for it,
you'll want to keep that disabled.
Even on the high power
graphics cards today,
if you start enabling lighting,
you will cause a graphics card to
do more processing and you will
ultimately lower the performance.
Now whether you actually see
that will depend on how fast,
you know,
what kind of demands your application
is putting on the graphics card.
But those are very complex operations
for the graphics card to perform.
phone.
So texture management.
So this is a very important topic because
a lot of games nowadays or applications
in general are using a lot of textures
and how to properly manage those can be,
make a big difference in the
application's performance.
So several things to remember.
Avoid uploading the
texture more than once.
Ideally what you want to do is you
want to give OpenGL the texture
and not keep handing it to OpenGL.
Don't delete it and then give it
back to it later if at all possible.
And instead let OpenGL do the management,
the bookkeeping of whether the texture
should be in video memory or not.
Avoid, so again, avoid keeping a copy.
And that will save,
Avoiding keeping a copy in the
application will save system memory.
The thing to remember here is
that OpenGL will keep a copy.
And so you're going to have two copies.
If you keep one in the application
and one is going to be kept in OpenGL,
you're going to have two
times that texture size.
So it's best if you
delete yours if possible.
So ways to get data, textures,
data into the graphics card
or into the driver fast.
There is an extension
called Apple Packed Pixel.
So this is the fastest way to
get pixel data into OpenGL.
And it's a very flexible format.
It will support all the
standard OpenGL pixel types,
Apple pixel types.
It will also support a number
of rather complex formats.
So you can see here,
I'm going to show you a few examples.
There are a few odd types
that may be useful for you.
You know, like 565 or 332,
depending on what your quality
requirement is or whether
you don't need a high-rate,
don't need a deep bit
depth per component.
You can get away with some of the
smaller bits per pixel components.
Minimize the, how often you change
your current texture.
So changing your current texture
is actually one of the most
expensive operations you can do.
And what that means is that changing
your current texture is a GL bind call.
And when you bind from
one texture to another,
you're basically just causing
OpenGL to potentially reconfigure
all of its texture combiners in
the hardware for the new texture.
Because the new texture is going to
require different blending modes.
And it can be fairly
expensive to do that setup.
So typically what you want to do in
the application if you have a lot of
data is you want to group your data
in groups with common texture types.
So that's the best way to group the data,
such that you minimize
your texture changes.
So scale textures to your hardware size.
So again, earlier we looked at
finding the VRAM size.
So what you'll want to do is you
can do some basic rudimentary
math in your application,
and just fundamentally try to scale your
application to fit on the graphics card.
So if you have a lot of textures,
you'll need to calculate how many
you're going to need necessarily
on the graphics card at any time.
It's not terribly
important to get it exact,
but you would like to keep it
within a reasonable bounds.
OpenGL is very efficient at paging.
So what you'll not want to do is try to
keep OpenGL always out of a paging mode.
You don't want to try to second guess the
exact size of the video memory available,
and when exactly OpenGL is
going to go into paging mode.
Because if you do that,
you're not going to let OpenGL grow
and utilize some of the mechanisms
internally to the driver that will try
to optimally page textures on and off.
So OpenGL uses, internally,
for paging textures on and off,
is called the LRU/MRU algorithm.
That stands for least recently used,
most recently used.
So depending on how committed you are,
how many textures are
committed per scene,
whether you're over committed that scene,
it will actually switch to
different mechanisms for
paging textures on and off,
trying to optimally keep the
right set on the graphics card,
and not unduly page them.
So that algorithm actually
works pretty well.
Also, particular to OS X,
is we built a mechanism that causes
almost no CPU work to page a texture.
So once a texture's in OpenGL,
and it had to get paged off,
back into system memory, let's say,
it costs very little CPU work
to get it back into the stream
and back uploaded onto OpenGL.
So while it will cost a little
bit of memory bandwidth,
while it's getting read
and it's getting processed,
it's going to cost a lot of time.
And if it gets read and it's
going to cost some AGP traffic,
the CPU cycles spent are
going to be pretty minimal.
So we find that letting OpenGL do the
paging isn't expensive for the CPU.
The CPU can keep on going.
And as long as you're not causing
too much bandwidth across the AGP,
you can get away with a
fair amount of paging.
So depending on what you're doing,
you're going to also want to
split your textures into tiles.
For,
and I've got a demo of this in a bit,
where if you're doing,
wanting to do smooth
animations of some sort,
trying to amortize the data stream
as it goes to the card and trying to
keep the drawing moving while large
images are moving up the stream.
So again if you look at the whole
process of OpenGL as a big data stream,
if you have a four megabyte texture,
that's a big block of data
in the middle of your stream.
So you can envision that under
some circumstances it would be
good to interlace that upload
with some polygon drawing,
maybe a frame here and there so
that you can amortize the texture
upload time going across the
bus and keep animations flowing.
So here's a little diagram
for texture management.
One thing that we recommend on
OS X is to split your texture
loading off to a separate thread.
If you're going to be spooling
through a lot of textures,
it's a good idea to maybe spawn a
thread that will do that work for you.
And the reason for that is
that--there's a couple reasons.
One is you can utilize a second CPU,
and two,
you can utilize preemptive multitasking
to balance out the loading,
the act of maybe reading
a texture from disk,
the cost of loading it in OpenGL.
You can use the preemptive capabilities
of OS X to spread that cost out so
you don't end up with a single point
in your rendering stream or in your
CPU cycles that are blocked trying to
get this texture uploaded and processed.
So it's a good idea.
So if we look at this,
this is a basic diagram of how to set
up a two-threaded--or what happens
when you set up a two-threaded.
Application,
one loading the OpenGL textures
and one doing the drawing.
So what happens is the first
thread is loading the textures,
and those textures will get
processed and put into the driver,
into the kernel driver.
So the kernel will have
them at this point,
and they will be sitting in the kernel
waiting to be uploaded to the card.
So you'll have done most of the work
of CPU cycles on the primary thread
of getting the data into the kernel.
And then you can load the textures.
So you'll have the first thread loaded,
and then you can have your second thread
come along and issue the drawing plans.
And as long as you have your thread
synchronization correctly organized,
then your data will be there
by the time you need it,
and everything will
just flow much smoother.
I've got a demo of this.
And this demo shows this basic
concept that the diagram had there.
So what this demo tries to
show is a couple concepts.
One is how to balance the--
requirements of your application with
quality and smoothness of frame rate.
So what we have here on the left
is we have a slider that will
adjust the quality of these images.
So for instance,
down here at the bottom I can get 64
by 64 textures and up on the top I get
1024 by 1024 and everything in between.
So what's interesting to look
at here is if you're trying
to say write a screen saver,
for instance,
and you're trying to get these
images up to the graphics card
while maintaining smooth animation,
you'll see that we get a hesitation.
And that hesitation is because one,
we only have one thread doing
the loading and the animation.
So we get a large hesitation while
we spool the texture off disk.
We decompress that JPEG and we load it
into OpenGL and give it to the driver.
So we can see that this isn't going
to lead to a very nice screen saver.
So we start looking for
techniques to smooth that out.
And one thing we can do is we can
spawn a thread and we can give the,
that thread the job of spooling
the texture off of disk
and loading it into OpenGL.
So what we see now is we see that it's
a lot smoother but it's not perfect.
So here's where you can start
deciding whether frame rate
and quality are important.
One thing you can do is obviously,
if you're not needing to
achieve those kinds of rates
of uploading and animating,
you can slow it down.
and the hiccups are almost gone.
The other thing you can do, obviously,
is if you want to stay relatively
fast animations is you can
lower your image quality.
So,
we're still going a little bit too fast
to get absolutely smooth animation.
But so you can see with this technique,
we've basically eliminated the
pauses in the animation stream and
we're able to get smooth animations
while we're spooling through
a large quantity of textures.
This demo actually will spool
through 200 megabytes of textures,
simulating a fairly large scenario.
And then the third thing we can do,
after we decide a frame rate quality,
we can also go to a tiled mode.
So a tiled mode is an attempt
to split the texture into many
pieces and to amortize the cost
of uploading that across the bus.
Now I've had a little bit of a
problem with the tiling mode,
so we're going to give it a shot though.
So the tiling mode theoretically
now is using the primary
thread to load the images.
And then the drawing thread is-- well,
there we go.
So I've got some thread
synchronization issues.
It's an attempt to try to
amortize the cost of moving
the data across to the card.
So with the MP case,
as soon as we went to
the multi-threaded case,
we offloaded the main thread,
its job of loading all of the data
from disk and then giving it to OpenGL.
But what we were not able to do in
the multi-threaded case is we're
not able to amortize the cost of
moving that image across the bus,
across the AGP up to the video memory.
So we still see a small
hiccup in the MP case.
So as soon as we go to tile mode,
what I've done here is I've
taken a small piece of the tile,
a small piece of the texture,
and I've uploaded one
small piece at a time.
So I'm able to upload one small piece
per frame and that way not see a big
four megabyte chunk of data in the data
stream as it goes to the graphics card.
And done correctly,
you can make... Get a lot of data up to
the system with very smooth animations.
So again,
if you look at the different scenarios,
looking at the stream case,
so there it is.
Multi-threaded, it's a lot smoother.
[Transcript missing]
The deficit is that if you are
passing small amounts of data,
there's a little bit of overhead
of logic to get into the routines.
So you're not going to want to call
a compile vertex array with three
vertices because you're better off going
to GL begin end because that's lower
overhead for a small amount of data.
So if you have large arrays of data,
let's say greater than 16,
16 may be pushing the smaller end of it,
but say greater than
16 vertices per array,
try using compile vertex array.
It could probably get you some benefit.
So looking at a chart here that
shows you primitives along the x-axis
and number of triangles that you
can render per second along the y,
you can see that the type of
primitive can make a large impact
in the number of triangles that
you can send through the system.
So down at the very bottom is polygons.
Polygons is the most rudimentary
way to send data to OpenGL.
And then near the upper end of
the spectrum is triangle strips.
So triangle strips is the best
way to send data through the
begin end immediate mode path.
And then at the very far
right is compile vertex array.
So you can see that compile vertex array,
if fed correctly,
can give you substantial
boost in performance.
Now the green bar shows what you
can do on a G3 and the blue and
the orange bar shows you on a G4.
There's not a huge difference,
but it can make a big difference
ultimately in your performance.
[Transcript missing]
Okay, so looking at how to
potentially optimize OpenGL,
I've got a number of slides here
to just basically walk through the
process that everyone should look
at when they're trying to figure
out how to simplify their code
and how to make it more optimal.
So we start off with a basic loop
that is going through setting
up a smooth shaded color mode,
setting up a color,
and then drawing a triangle.
So we're doing this every
time through the loop.
So we're drawing one triangle,
we're doing a state change per triangle,
and obviously we're not going to
get a lot of data through this
because it breaks every rule we have,
and that is you're doing state
changes and you're not passing
a lot of data per begin end.
So the first thing we do is remove the
state changes out of the loop and that
will obviously give you the benefit
that now we're passing a lot of data
and we're not changing the state and
we're not causing OpenGL to have to
do a lot of state management below.
But we still haven't pulled any,
done any optimizations with
how we're passing vertex data.
So the next thing we do then is, well,
actually we simplify the state.
And we simplify it by just
going to a flat shaded.
So we notice that we're not
passing a color per vertex,
meaning the color is
flat shaded triangles.
So we're going to change that to flat.
But then we pull the triangles out of the
loop and that's an attempt to maximize
the amount of data per begin end.
And by doing this we can increase
the performance by quite a bit.
And in fact after this I have
another demonstration to
show you the effect of this.
So you can see the effect of that.
It can be pretty dramatic
just doing that step alone.
Then what we do is we try to simplify
the API that we're utilizing.
Instead of passing all the
data through registers,
we pass a vertex--a pointer to the data,
and it allows OpenGL to potentially
optimize how it's copying the data.
You're not doing a lot of register
setup to get the data through.
Then we take the step of
realizing that what we're actually
passing is a triangle strip.
So we change the data type
to a triangle strip and we
reorganize how we're passing it.
And so now we've just reduced
the amount of data going to
OpenGL by a factor of three.
Again, getting a big performance boost
out of doing a step like that.
And then what we do is we realize that we
have all the data actually in an array,
so we start using a vertex
array and using draw elements
to draw out of that array.
So now we've eliminated
the loop altogether,
and we are simply making five function
calls to handle all the drawing,
whereas if we looked at the
beginning of the slides,
we were probably making
hundreds or thousands.
So we've eliminated all
the function call overhead,
and we have given OpenGL an opportunity
to try to optimize internally
for how it's going to want to
get the data into the command stream.
So now I have another demo
showing some of that effect.
[Transcript missing]
So what this demo is is a
spherical mapped mesh that is
being animated with a wave motion.
And where we start this application
right now is in a mode where the
application hasn't been tuned and
the rendering hasn't been tuned.
And the way we can tell that is
that the red bar represents the
time being spent in the application.
The green bar simulates the time being
spent calculating the wave motion.
And the blue bar is the
time being spent in OpenGL.
So we can see we're spending
quite a bit of time in all these,
we're spending most of the
time in the application.
So a little experiment that's interesting
to run is if I take this application
tuning slider and I bump it all the way
up so that the application becomes tuned,
we can see we get about-- we go from
20 frames per second almost to 40.
So we almost double our
frame rate by doing that.
So now if I move this slide over here,
which simulates optimizing OpenGL through
the basic steps I just went through,
the first one is individual triangles.
The second one here has now moved
the begin end outside the loop,
and it's passing as much data
as possible per begin end.
So we can see that we immediately
get some performance out of that.
We can see the blue bar is
changing by about a factor or two.
But our OpenGL performance
hasn't changed a whole lot.
It only went up about five frames.
So by doing that step,
we didn't get a whole lot.
Now if we go to the top one,
that's using vertex arrays.
And again, it didn't change a whole lot.
The interesting thing to learn about
this is that if we take the slider
and we move it up for the application,
now we realize that we have
gotten 100% improvement on just
optimizing the application.
So optimizing one or the
other only got us a marginal
improvement to a 2x improvement,
but if I optimize both,
I go from 20 frames a second to 60,
so I get a 3x improvement.
So the combined effect is very important.
So it's important to realize that
where the time is being spent
can be the application or OpenGL.
So the second thing we can do then is,
like we've been showing here,
is to spawn a thread.
Now if we spawn a thread and we
move the green bar onto the thread,
we can see that now we are
utilizing both CPUs in this machine.
This machine is a dual 500.
So now we are animating
at 200 frames a second,
and we started off at 20.
So we got a 10x improvement out of this.
And so now it's animating silky smooth,
whereas before it was barely
crawling along at 20 frames a second.
So this is a good example of,
a basic example of where you
can start from a pretty dismal
performance and do some simple things,
and all of a sudden the whole application
comes alive and you're getting 1.5
million triangles a second and able
to deliver a much better application.
Okay, so now we've kind of talked
about the application setup.
Basically how to drive OpenGL.
And all those things are
fundamentally CPU-oriented operations.
And that's a process of optimizing how
effectively you're utilizing the CPU.
So now we're going to talk about
per-fragment operations a little bit.
Per-fragment operations are fundamentally
what the graphics card's going to
have to do to convert your data from
a triangle to the image that you,
into the frame buffer.
And what types of blending or
texturing operations need to be done.
And there's a few things just to
keep in mind while you're doing this,
while you're programming.
One is to utilize multi-texture
instead of multi-pass.
So basically all the graphics
cards on OS X that are accelerated
on OS X today have multi-texture,
multiple texture units.
So if you want to apply two textures,
let's say, you can do it in one pass.
You can load two textures,
one in texture unit zero and
one in the texture unit one,
and you can apply both
textures simultaneously.
And this actually has two benefits.
One is that, again,
lowers the CPU overhead because your
application's not having to loop
through the rendering twice and reissue
drawing commands to do the second pass.
But the second one is,
is that it helps the graphics card
optimize its memory traffic because
you're not writing to the frame buffer on
one pass and then having to come back on
a second pass and write the pixel again.
Instead, you're allowing the app,
the graphics card to read two
textiles out of the frame buffer
and then come back on the second
pass and write the pixel again.
Instead, you're allowing the app,
the graphics card to read two
textiles out of the texture units,
out of the textures you've defined,
combine them and write it
once out of the frame buffer.
So it lowers the ultimate bandwidth that
you're consuming on the graphics card.
So you can,
you can get performance a couple
ways by going to a multi-texture
instead of multi-pass.
So avoid, when possible,
obviously anything I'm gonna say here
is just a suggestion of things to try
to work your way around and sometimes
you're looking for an effect and
you have to do these operations.
But, you know, I'm not gonna say that
you should do this.
I'm not gonna say that
But avoid read, modify,
write operations on the frame buffer.
So read, modify,
write operations are anything that will,
requires the frame buffer value
to participate in the value that,
participate in the color calculation
that will result and be finally
put back into the frame buffer.
So things that do that are blending.
So if you're blending with the final
destination of the frame buffer,
it's gonna have to read the frame buffer,
it's gonna have to read its text.
It's gonna have to read the text.
It's gonna have to read the textures.
It's gonna have to combine it
all and then write it back out.
So you're gonna get 2x the bandwidth.
[Transcript missing]
Okay, another thing that's important
to keep in mind is that modern
graphics cards have the ability
to do high-level culling for you.
So if you're drawing lots of triangles,
it can, ahead of time,
cull those triangles out.
And it's called Hierarchical Z.
And Hierarchical Z will
[Transcript missing]
So, some of this is a review.
We're going to talk about
OpenGL extensions and what
OpenGL extensions can help you.
We already talked about
CompileVertexArray,
but just to review really quickly,
this is good for a large
number of vertices.
It reduces the number of transformations.
It reduces memory traffic.
It allows OpenGL to pre-compile
data into an AGP buffer ready
for transmitting to the card.
So, whenever possible, again,
use CompileVertexArray.
Texture compression.
Texture compression is also
a very good extension to use.
It allows you to minimize the
system memory bandwidth of
moving that texture around.
It saves you system memory itself.
It saves the bandwidth of moving
that texture up to the graphics card.
And it also saves,
can benefit the graphics card
itself by lowering the bandwidth
it takes to read the texture,
a text will out,
and to render with it because it will
do on the fly texture decompression
and it will better utilize the on
cache memory on the graphics card.
So, texture compression can be effective.
It's really going to depend
on where your limitations,
where your performance bottlenecks
are in your application,
but it's a good one to keep in mind.
Multitexture is the extension
for doing multitexturing,
like we'd mentioned,
utilizing more than one texture unit.
Apple Pack Pixel, again,
is the extension for the best way
to pass pixel data to OpenGL and
allows you to get the most data,
the best bandwidth utilization of
moving pixel data to the OpenGL system.
And the other thing it does
actually is it saves system memory.
So if you're able to store a texture in a
more optimal format for your application,
let's say 1555,
obviously that's going to be half the
memory utilization of an eight component,
eight bits per component texture.
So that will give you some
system memory savings,
some bandwidth savings,
and it'll also save video
memory on the graphics card.
So, quick summary.
So, again,
going over some of the priorities.
So,
the thing we always tell people is they,
again, need to optimize their
application because 75% of the
time is typically spent in the
application and 25% in OpenGL.
So, optimizing your application is
going to be important and you won't
get good performance until you've
gotten that to an acceptable level.
Scale your application
to the target platform.
Try to determine your VRAM,
how much video memory is available.
Determine how much system
memory is available.
Try to stay within acceptable
bounds that won't cause the
system memory to go into paging.
Determine maybe the number of
texture units on the graphics card
so that you can do multi-texturing
instead of multi-pass.
Look at your CPU type.
Try to utilize a number of
OpenGL extensions that will help simplify
how the data is being passed to OpenGL.
So, that's the first thing.
As well as potentially
give you better effects.
Allow the user to adjust the graphic
settings such that if the user is
experiencing problems on a particular
platform for one reason or another,
allowing the user to vary the
quality settings such that they can
get the performance that they are
looking for obviously is going to be
a friendly thing to do for the user.
It will give the user control
over some of the aspects of
how the application runs.
Okay.
So for more information,
there's two good books on OpenGL.
And anybody that's
doing OpenGL programming
should have these books.
One is the OpenGL programming guide,
and the other one is
the reference manual.
So these books are invaluable.
They're very well written.
And if you're just starting
OpenGL or whether you're an expert,
these books are always sitting
right next to me on my desk.
So for online help,
there's some good resources.
You'll want to go to www.opengl.org.
This is the official OpenGL web page,
and it's got all kinds of
neat news announcements,
resources.
It has lists of applications
that are utilizing OpenGL,
documentation.
It's got all the resources
you'll need for finding out
what's the latest in OpenGL.
And then there's the lists at apple.com
where you can join the Apple OpenGL list,
and there's lots of Macintosh-specific
discussions going on in that list
where you can participate or learn
from some of the discussions that
are going on there or send an email
of your own and ask a particularly
difficult problem that you need answered.
And lastly,
we met Sergio at the beginning here,
so if you have any questions
about OpenGL at Apple,
you can contact Sergio.
And here's his contact information.
Sergio is our product
representative at Apple,
and he can direct you to somebody in
Apple if he's not the right person or
help you with some of your product needs.
And lastly, we have--after this session,
we have advanced
OpenGL rendering techniques.
It's a very interesting
presentation that will go into
utilizing some OpenGL extensions
for doing advanced rendering.
I highly suggest it for people that
are looking for new techniques and some
capabilities of graphics cards today.
It'll show you some interesting
demos and some nice effects.